.Dd November 19, 2013
.Dt GITSH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gitsh
.Nd Interactive shell for the git version control system
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm gitsh
.Op Fl -version
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl -git Ar CMD
.Op file
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm gitsh
is a language for interacting with a
.Xr git 1
repository. It supports all git subcommands, custom aliases, and custom
commands for interacting with the shell itself. Commands, path names,
branch names, and tag names can all be completed using tab completion.
.Pp
Running gitsh with no arguments will start an interactive session. Quit by
either typing
.Ic :exit
or
.Ic :q
or sending an EOF character.
.Pp
Passing the path to a file containing a series of commands or sending a series
of commands to gitsh's standard input will run each of those commands in
sequence.
.Pp
It supports these options and arguments:
.
.Bl -tag
.It Fl -git Ar CMD
use the git command specified in CMD, instead of the default (
.Ic /usr/bin/env git
or as specified by the
.Ic gitsh.gitCommand
configuration option
).
.It Fl h , Fl -help
display a help message and exit.
.It Fl -version
display the version number and exit.
.It Ic file
the path to a file of commands to be executed. If the path is
.Ic -
then the commands will be read from the standard input.
.El
.Pp
Within the shell you can use the following types of commands:
.Bl -tag
.It Ic command [arguments]
execute a Git command or alias with the given arguments, e.g.
.Ic status
will execute
.Xr git-status 1 .
.It Ic !command [arguments]
execute a shell command with the given arguments, e.g.
.Ic !ls
will execute
.Xr ls 1 .
.It Ic :command [arguments]
execute a built-in gitsh command. See the section on
.Sx BUILT-IN COMMANDS
for a list of supported commands.
.It Ic #comment
lines beginning with a
.Ic #
will be treated as comments and ignored.
.El
.Pp
Commands can be combined using the following operators, which have similar
semantics to
.Xr sh 1 :
.Bl -tag
.It Ic left && right
only execute
.Ic right
if
.Ic left
succeeds.
.It Ic left || right
only execute
.Ic right
if
.Ic left
fails.
.It Ic left\ ; right
execute
.Ic left ,
and then
.Ic right.
.El
.
.Sh PROMPT
The prompt changes based on the status of the repository. By default it consist
of three parts: the basename of the current working directory, the current HEAD
and the terminator sigil.
.Pp
The current HEAD is a branch name, tag name, abbreviated SHA, or the text
.Li uninitialized
when the present working directory is not a git repository.
.Pp
The state of the repository is reflected by the terminating sigil and the color
of both the current HEAD and the sigil:
.Bl -column "Current directory is not a git repo" ".Sy Sigil" "Orange foreground" -offset indent
.It Sy Status                               Ta Sy Sigil     Ta Sy Color
.It Current directory is not a git repo     Ta !!           Ta Red background
.It Repo has untracked files                Ta !            Ta Red foreground
.It Repo has modified files                 Ta &            Ta Orange foreground
.It All other states                        Ta @            Ta Blue foreground
.El
.Pp
.Ss Prompt customisation
The prompt can be customised by setting the
.Ic gitsh.prompt
variable using the
.Xr git-config 1
command. The following placeholders can be used in the custom prompt:
.
.Bl -column ".Sy Placeholder" ".Sy Meaning" -offset indent
.It Sy Placeholder  Ta Sy Meaning
.It %#              Ta terminating sigil (see previous table)
.It %b              Ta current HEAD (branch name, tag name, etc.)
.It %d              Ta absolute path to current working directory
.It \&%D            Ta basename of the current working directory
.It %c              Ta start coloring based on status (see previous table)
.It %w              Ta return to default color (e.g. after using %c)
.El
.Pp
For example, setting
.Ic gitsh.prompt
to
.Ic (%b)%d%#
would produce prompts like
.Ic (master)/home/me/repo@
and
.Ic (uninitialized)/home/me!!
.Sh BUILT-IN COMMANDS
Built-in commands are used to give instructions to the shell. To distinguish
them from git commands, and to avoid collisions with git aliases and
extensions, they are prefixed with a
.Ic :
character.
.Pp
The following commands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic :set variable value
sets a variable in the gitsh environment to the given value.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ :set george "George <george@thoughtbot.com>"
@ commit --author $george
.Ed
.Pp
Variable names containing a dot can be used to temporarily override
.Xr git-config 1
variables for the duration of a gitsh session.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ :set user.name George
@ :set user.email george@thoughtbot.com
@ commit
.Ed
.Pp
See the section on
.Sx VARIABLES
for more information.
.It Ic :echo string ...
prints the given strings to standard output, followed by a newline. All
whitespace is collapsed into one space. This can be useful for viewing
the value of a variable:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ :echo $user.name
.Ed
.Pp
Or for a mix of variables and arbitrary strings:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ :echo "This is ${user.name}'s work"
.Ed
.It Ic :cd path
changes directory to the given path.
.It Ic :exit
ends the gitsh session.
.It Ic :q
alias for
.Ic :exit .
.El
.
.Sh VARIABLES
Variables can be read using the
.Ic $
prefix. There are three kinds of variables supported by gitsh:
.Pp
.Bl -enum
.It
Variables set using the
.Ic :set
command.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ :set greeting "Hello, world"
@ :echo $greeting
.Ed
.It
All
.Xr git-config 1
settings can be treated as variables in gitsh. For example, the following
commands will produce the same output.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ config user.name
@ :echo $user.name
.Ed
.It
There are a number of "magic variables" which expose information about the
current state of the repository.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic $_prior
The name of the previous branch that was checked out. This is usually
equivalent to
.Ic @{-1} ,
but will also work in situations where the branch name is required.
.It Ic $_merge_base
When there is a merge in progress, this will be the hash of the merge's base
commit. It is equivalent to the output of
.Ic merge-base HEAD MERGE_HEAD .
.It Ic $_rebase_base
When there is a rebase in progress, this will be the hash of the commit onto
which we are rebasing, for example after running
.Ic rebase master
this variable would evaluate to the hash of the commit at the head of the
.Ic master
branch.
.El
.El
.Pp
Unset variables will be ignored, as then are in
.Xr sh 1 .
For example, the commit message produced by the following command will be
.Ic "a commit" :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@ commit -m $unset "a commit"
.Ed
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The following
.Xr git-config 1
variables can be used to customise the behaviour of gitsh:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic gitsh.historyFile
The path to the gitsh history file. The default is
.Ic ~/.gitsh_history
.It Ic gitsh.historySize
The number of lines of history to save in the gitsh history file.
The default is 500.
.It Ic gitsh.prompt
The format of the prompt. See the
.Sx PROMPT
section above for details.
.It Ic gitsh.noGreeting
If this is set to
.Ic true
then no greeting message will be displayed when gitsh starts.
.It Ic gitsh.defaultCommand
The command that will be run when a user presses return without entering any
command. By default this is
.Ic status .
.It Ic gitsh.gitCommand
The command that gitsh will use to run git commands. The default is
.Ic /usr/bin/env git .
.El
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TERM
The
.Xr terminfo 1
name for the terminal. This is used to determine whether to
show colors.
.El
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
init
commit --allow-empty
checkout -b new-feature
rebase master
:exit
.Ed
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr git 1
.Xr gittutorial 7
.
.Sh HISTORY
Written by
.An "George Brocklehurst" Aq george@thoughtbot.com ,
based on a prototype by
.An "Mike Burns" Aq mburns@thoughtbot.com
from October 2013, inspired by a talk by
.An "Reda Lemeden" Aq reda@thoughtbot.com .
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "thoughtbot" Aq hello@thoughtbot.com
